# Patch Analysis-based Surface Correntropy-induced Sparse Coding and Max-Pooling (PASCS-MP)

This is the geometric feature extraction pipeline for the paper: Chen, Y., Su, Y., Wu, J., Chen, K., Atri, A., Caselli, R.J., Reiman, E.M., Wang, Y. and Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 2023. Combining Blood-Based Biomarkers and Structural MRI Measurements to Distinguish Persons With and Without Significant Amyloid Plaques. bioRxiv, pp.2023-10.


The original development of this method can be found in our previous publications:

Wu, J., Dong, Q., Gui, J., Zhang, J., Su, Y., Chen, K., Thompson, P.M., Caselli, R.J., Reiman, E.M., Ye, J. and Wang, Y., 2021. Predicting brain amyloid using multivariate morphometry statistics, sparse coding, and Correntropy: Validation in 1,101 individuals from the ADNI and OASIS databases. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 15, p.669595.

Authors:

	Yanxi Chen, email: ychen855@asu.edu
 	Jianfeng Wu, email: Jianfeng.Wu@asu.edu
  	Jie Zhang, email: JieZhang.Joena@asu.edu

If you find this work useful, please cite:

1. Chen, Y., Su, Y., Wu, J., Chen, K., Atri, A., Caselli, R.J., Reiman, E.M., Wang, Y. and Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 2023. Combining Blood-Based Biomarkers and Structural MRI Measurements to Distinguish Persons With and Without Significant Amyloid Plaques. bioRxiv, pp.2023-10.

2. Wu, J., Dong, Q., Gui, J., Zhang, J., Su, Y., Chen, K., Thompson, P.M., Caselli, R.J., Reiman, E.M., Ye, J. and Wang, Y., 2021. Predicting brain amyloid using multivariate morphometry statistics, sparse coding, and Correntropy: Validation in 1,101 individuals from the ADNI and OASIS databases. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 15, p.669595.

## Step 1: Hippocampus registration, segmentation, surface reconstruction and parameterization
## Step 2: Extracting MMS features

Input: Nifti images

Output: Hippocampus surface mesh with MMS features (RD and mTBM). We name them JFeatures and save them in .m files.

Steps 1 and 2 can be done by our MTSMS pipeline: https://gsl.lab.asu.edu/mtsms/.

## Step 3: Select patches on the hippocampal surface mesh

This step is to be run by matlab.

Input: JFeature files

Output: Selected patches. Default filename: MMS_patches.txt

Usage: in run_select_patch.m, set the dataset name and folders containg JFeature files (assuming positive and negative separated in two folders). Then run run_select_patch.m using matlab.

## Step 4: Correntropy-based sparse coding

This step is implemented by C++. The compiled Linux 64-bit binary is available as bin/run_correntropy. Source code is in src/run_correntropy.cpp.

Input: patches generated by the previous step.

Output:
	1) sparse code: MMS_sparse.txt.
	2) initial dictionary: MMS_initdict.txt.
 	3) final dictionary: MMS_dict.txt.

Parameters:
	1) lambda: regularization parameter. Default: 4.0.
 	2) sigma: kernal size of the correntropy loss function. Default: 2.0.
  	3) feature dim: dimension of the output features. Default: 2000.
   	4) sample dim: dimension of input sample. Default: 400.

Usage: ./run_correntropy [PATCH] [SPARSE_CODE] [INITIAL_DICT] [FINAL_DICT] [LAMBDA] [SIGMA] [FEAT_DIM] [SAMPLE_DIM]

Example: ./run_correntropy MMS_patches.txt MMS_sparse.txt MMS_initialdict.txt MMS_dict.txt 4.0 2.0 2000 400

## Step 5: Max-pooling

Input: sparse code generated by the previous step.

Output: pooled MMS features.

Parameters:
	1) feature dim: dimension of sparses feature. Same as Step 4. Default: 2000.
 	2) patch size: number of patches for each subject. Default: 1008.

Usage: ./MaxPooling [FEAT_DIM] [PATCH_SIZE] [SPARSE_CODE] [OUTPUT]

Example: ./MaxPooling 1008 2000 MMS_sparse.txt MMS_features.txt

## Step 6: Downstream tasks.

MMS_features.txt contains the sample feature matrix and can be used in downstream tasks. For example, in Chen, Y., Su, Y., Wu, J., Chen, K., Atri, A., Caselli, R.J., Reiman, E.M., Wang, Y. and Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, 2023. Combining Blood-Based Biomarkers and Structural MRI Measurements to Distinguish Persons With and Without Significant Amyloid Plaques. bioRxiv, pp.2023-10., we implemented a random forest classifier for brain amyloid positivity classification.

## If you need a deeper dive into the technical details, here is a list of previous methods and their original publications:

1. Patch Analysis-based Surface Sparse-coding and Max-Pooling (PASS-MP): 

2. PASS: 

3. Stochastic Coordinate Coding: 


